README.md, before:

# \<xtal-method\>

The \<xtal-method\> web component is a dependency free custom element that allows one to utilize a functional renderer, like [lit-html](https://alligator.io/web-components/lit-html/) or [hyperHTML](https://medium.com/@WebReflection/hyperhtml-a-virtual-dom-alternative-279db455ee0e), without turning the entire application into one giant heap of JavaScript.  

With this component, one creates a localized inline connection between an input JavaScript object and a functional renderer directly in the markup.  The (tagged) literal template can be defined via web component light child:

```html
<xtal-method input="[[todos]]">
    <script type="module ish">
        const root = 'http://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lit-html/';
        const { repeat } = await import(root + 'lib/repeat.js');
        const { html, render } = await import(root + 'lit-html.js');
        const todoFormatter = items => html`
            <h1>My Todos</h1>
            <ul>
                                                                        ${repeat(items, item => item.id,  item => html`
                <li class="${item.done ? 'done' : ''}">${item.value}</li>
                                                                        `)}
            </ul>
        `;
        export const renderer = (list, target) => render(todoFormatter(list), target);

    </script>
</xtal-method>
                
```

Is a custom element required in order to accomplish the localness feature of \<xtal-method\>?  Alas, no, not when support for support for [import.meta](http://2ality.com/2017/11/import-meta.html) becomes widespread.  I think.  Still, the hope is that this custom element will reduce annoying boilerplate code, as we shall see.

\<xtal-method\> only recognizes two properties currently:  input and renderer.

As the input property of \<xtal-method\> changes, the renderer will generate the html output, and insert it adjacent to the \<xtal-method\> element instance.

The script tag inside the \<xtal-method\> will apply all the export const's to the xtal-method tag.  So the initial input property can also be specified  (server-side generated)  within the script tag.  This might be useful for the first paint display, and then the input property of the custom element can change based on ajax calls prompted by user actions for subsequent renders:

```html
<xtal-method>
    <script type="module ish">
        const root = 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lit-html/';
        const { repeat } = await import(root + 'lib/repeat.js');
        const { html, render } = await import(root + 'lit-html.js');
        const todoFormatter = items => html`
            <h1>My Todos</h1>
            <ul>
                                                                        ${repeat(items, item => item.id,  item => html`
                <li class="${item.done ? 'done' : ''}">${item.value}</li>
                                                                        `)}
            </ul>
        `;
        export const renderer = (list, target) => render(todoFormatter(list), target);

        //server-side generated?
        export const input = [
            { "id": 1, "value": "Sweep the floor", "done": false },
            { "id": 2, "value": "Prepare fancy salad", "done": true },
            { "id": 3, "value": "Get a funky haircut", "done": false }
        ]
    </script>
</xtal-method>
```

Another approach to server-side generated content is discussed below.

## Syntax Shenanigans

It is highly desired that the contents of the script tag not be processed by the browser before being manipulated by the \<xtal-method\> as it is a waste of processing and a potential source of unintended side effects (like generating an error in the console when unexpected syntax is encountered).  There are a number of ways this can be done, with the pro's and con's listed below:

1. Wrap the script tag inside a template tag.  \<xtal-method\> supports this.  It is probably my preferred approach, except for one major stumbling block:  It appears that my favorite Polymer component, \<dom-bind\>, purges tags it perceives to be active script tags, if they are inside a template wrapper.  Don't quote me on this, this is simply what I've observed via trial and error.  As the demo relies heavily on dom-bind (so the entire demo can be declarative-ish), and I use this tag repeatedly, this immediately poses a problem in my mind, which is why the following alternatives are listed (and used in the demo).
2. Give the script tag attribute *type* a value no one has heard of, like type="text/lit-html".  No need for the template wrapper, then.  \<xtal-method\> also supports this. The problem is that VS Code stops providing syntax highlighting / basic linting when doing this.  More sophisticated editors, like WebStorm can be trained to recognize custom attributes.  And of course a VS code extension could be built.  This solution should work with a high degree of confidence.
3. Give the script tag attribute *type* a value that the browser will (hopefully) **not** recognize as JavaScript, but your favorite editor is fooled into thinking **is** JavaScript.  For VS Code, an example of such a value is (currently) type="module ish", which is shown above. I plan to try this out for a while in different browsers (as they start to support dynamic imports).  Hopefully no one will bring this loophole to the VS Code team's attention (shh!!!).

### Boilerplate Busting

There will tend to be some amount of repetition between instances of this web component, assuming the same rendering library is used more than once.

In particular, the import statements will be the first candidate for sharing.

To share fragments of Javascript, define a fragment of JavaScript thusly:

```html
  <script type="module ish" id="root-lit-html">
    const root = 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lit-html/';
  </script>
  <script type="module ish" id="lit-html">
      const { html, render } = await import(root + 'lit-html.js');
  </script>
  <script type="module ish" id="lit-html/lib/repeat">
    const { repeat } = await import(root + 'lib/repeat.js');
  </script>
```

(Place in header of index.html?)

And then reference it as follows:

```html
<xtal-method input="[[todos]]">
    <script type="module ish">
        scriptTag=>XtalMethod.insert(scriptTag, '#root-lit-html,#lit-html,#lit-html/lib/repeat'); //https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS2/issues/671
        const todoFormatter = items => html`
            <h1>My Todos</h1>
            <ul>
                                                                        ${repeat(items, item => item.id,  item => html`
                <li class="${item.done ? 'done' : ''}">${item.value}</li>
                                                                        `)}
            </ul>
        `;
        export const renderer = (list, target) => render(todoFormatter(list), target);
    </script>
</xtal-method>
```

The second argument, of type string, of 'xtalMethod.import()' is an extremely limited pseudo css selector.  To specify multiple script tags by id, use the css comma delimiter.  Fragments will be inserted in the order of the list.

## Install the Polymer-CLI

First, make sure you have the [Polymer CLI](https://www.npmjs.com/package/polymer-cli) installed. Then run `polymer serve` to serve your element locally.

## Viewing Your Element

```
$ polymer serve
```

## Running Tests

```
$ polymer test
```

Your application is already set up to be tested via [web-component-tester](https://github.com/Polymer/web-component-tester). Run `polymer test` to run your application's test suite locally.

Commit message:

minimal support for server-side rendering / first paint content.

README.md, after:

# \<xtal-method\>

The \<xtal-method\> web component is a dependency free custom element that allows one to utilize a functional renderer, like [lit-html](https://alligator.io/web-components/lit-html/) or [hyperHTML](https://medium.com/@WebReflection/hyperhtml-a-virtual-dom-alternative-279db455ee0e), without turning the entire application into one giant heap of JavaScript.  

With this component, one creates a localized inline connection between an input JavaScript object and a functional renderer directly in the markup.  The (tagged) literal template can be defined via web component light child:

```html
<xtal-method input="[[todos]]">
    <script type="module ish">
        const root = 'http://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lit-html/';
        const { repeat } = await import(root + 'lib/repeat.js');
        const { html, render } = await import(root + 'lit-html.js');
        const todoFormatter = items => html`
            <h1>My Todos</h1>
            <ul>
                                                                        ${repeat(items, item => item.id,  item => html`
                <li class="${item.done ? 'done' : ''}">${item.value}</li>
                                                                        `)}
            </ul>
        `;
        export const renderer = (list, target) => render(todoFormatter(list), target);

    </script>
</xtal-method>
                
```

Is a custom element required in order to accomplish the localness feature of \<xtal-method\>?  Alas, no, not when support for support for [import.meta](http://2ality.com/2017/11/import-meta.html) becomes widespread.  I think.  Still, the hope is that this custom element will reduce annoying boilerplate code, as we shall see.

\<xtal-method\> only recognizes two key, required properties for anything to happen:  input and renderer.

As the input property of \<xtal-method\> is established and then changes, the renderer will generate the html output, and insert it adjacent to the \<xtal-method\> element instance, or update it the same target element later. See server-side processing section below for an alternative.

The script tag inside the \<xtal-method\> will apply all the export const's to the xtal-method tag.  So the initial input property can also be specified  (server-side generated)  within the script tag.  This might be useful for the first paint display, and then the input property of the custom element can change based on ajax calls prompted by user actions for subsequent renders:

```html
<xtal-method>
    <script type="module ish">
        const root = 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lit-html/';
        const { repeat } = await import(root + 'lib/repeat.js');
        const { html, render } = await import(root + 'lit-html.js');
        const todoFormatter = items => html`
            <h1>My Todos</h1>
            <ul>
                                                                        ${repeat(items, item => item.id,  item => html`
                <li class="${item.done ? 'done' : ''}">${item.value}</li>
                                                                        `)}
            </ul>
        `;
        export const renderer = (list, target) => render(todoFormatter(list), target);

        //server-side generated?
        export const input = [
            { "id": 1, "value": "Sweep the floor", "done": false },
            { "id": 2, "value": "Prepare fancy salad", "done": true },
            { "id": 3, "value": "Get a funky haircut", "done": false }
        ]
    </script>
</xtal-method>
```

Another approach to server-side generated content is discussed below.

## Syntax Shenanigans

It is highly desired that the contents of the script tag not be processed by the browser before being manipulated by the \<xtal-method\> as it is a waste of processing and a potential source of unintended side effects (like generating an error in the console when unexpected syntax is encountered).  There are a number of ways this can be done, with the pro's and con's listed below:

1. Wrap the script tag inside a template tag.  \<xtal-method\> supports this.  It is probably my preferred approach, except for one major stumbling block:  It appears that my favorite Polymer component, \<dom-bind\>, purges tags it perceives to be active script tags, if they are inside a template wrapper.  Don't quote me on this, this is simply what I've observed via trial and error.  As the demo relies heavily on dom-bind (so the entire demo can be declarative-ish), and I use this tag repeatedly, this immediately poses a problem in my mind, which is why the following alternatives are listed (and used in the demo).
2. Give the script tag attribute *type* a value no one has heard of, like type="text/lit-html".  No need for the template wrapper, then.  \<xtal-method\> also supports this. The problem is that VS Code stops providing syntax highlighting / basic linting when doing this.  More sophisticated editors, like WebStorm can be trained to recognize custom attributes.  And of course a VS code extension could be built.  This solution should work with a high degree of confidence.
3. Give the script tag attribute *type* a value that the browser will (hopefully) **not** recognize as JavaScript, but your favorite editor is fooled into thinking **is** JavaScript.  For VS Code, an example of such a value is (currently) type="module ish", which is shown above. I plan to try this out for a while in different browsers (as they start to support dynamic imports).  Hopefully no one will bring this loophole to the VS Code team's attention (shh!!!).

### Boilerplate Busting with Script inserts

There will tend to be some amount of repetition between instances of this web component, assuming the same rendering library is used more than once.

In particular, the import statements will be the first candidate for sharing.

To share fragments of Javascript, define a fragment of JavaScript thusly:

```html
  <script type="module ish" id="root-lit-html">
    const root = 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lit-html/';
  </script>
  <script type="module ish" id="lit-html">
      const { html, render } = await import(root + 'lit-html.js');
  </script>
  <script type="module ish" id="lit-html/lib/repeat">
    const { repeat } = await import(root + 'lib/repeat.js');
  </script>
```

(Place in header of index.html?)

And then reference it as follows:

```html
<xtal-method input="[[todos]]">
    <script type="module ish">
        scriptTag=>XtalMethod.insert(scriptTag, '#root-lit-html,#lit-html,#lit-html/lib/repeat'); //https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS2/issues/671
        const todoFormatter = items => html`
            <h1>My Todos</h1>
            <ul>
                                                                        ${repeat(items, item => item.id,  item => html`
                <li class="${item.done ? 'done' : ''}">${item.value}</li>
                                                                        `)}
            </ul>
        `;
        export const renderer = (list, target) => render(todoFormatter(list), target);
    </script>
</xtal-method>
```

The second argument, of type string, of 'xtalMethod.import(),' is an extremely limited pseudo css selector.  To specify multiple script tags by id, use the css comma delimiter.  Fragments will be inserted in the order of the list.

### Server-side rendering if initial paint

By default, \<xtal-method\> dynamically creates a div element as the rendering taget, and prepends it to the \<xtal-method\> tag.  This serves as the target element for where to dump the html (or svg).

However, it may be desirable to improve the time to first paint by generating the initial HTML on the server, and not providing any input object initially, until user interaction requires an update.

In this case, insert the html as a light child within the \<xtal-method\>, starting from a single root tag.  The root tag of that html should have attribute role="target".  

## Install the Polymer-CLI

First, make sure you have the [Polymer CLI](https://www.npmjs.com/package/polymer-cli) installed. Then run `polymer serve` to serve your element locally.

## Viewing Your Element

```
$ polymer serve
```

## Running Tests

```
$ polymer test
```

Your application is already set up to be tested via [web-component-tester](https://github.com/Polymer/web-component-tester). Run `polymer test` to run your application's test suite locally.
